---
layout: post
title: Relativistic time of arrival operators
date: 2021-10-01
description: thesis proposal
tags: news presentation
categories: 
comments: true

---


My thesis proposal was held online via Zoom last October 5, 2021 wherein the goal of my thesis is to construct relativistic time of arrival operators. For those interested, you can download my slides [here]({{ '/assets/pdf/thesisproposal.pdf' | relative_url }})


Classical mechanics treats time only as a parameter. Meanwhile, time in special and general relativity acquires a dynamical concept. Special relativity treats time and space on equal footing as coordinates of a four-vector in special which are intertwined with each other under Lorentz transforms. Meanwhile, the geometry of spacetime affects the dynamics of time in general relativity and allows material clocks to display proper time. Now, in quantum theory, time is still treated as a parameter in the same way as classical mechanics treats time. This parameter  t then governs the evolution of the system. These different treatment of time then poses a problem when physicists attempt to unify general relativity and quantum theory and constitutes one aspect of the problem of time in quantum gravity. We have different notions of time, such as entropic time, coordinate time, parametric time, and so on. One might argue that the problem of time might be because we are using a different notions of time which leads to confusion. To avoid this, we will only deal with the concept of time of arrival (TOA).

For a discussion of non-relativistic TOA operators, you can refer to my previous <a href="/blog/2021/quantum-toa/">post</a>. One of the motivations to construct a relativistic TOA operator is that special relativity treats time and space on equal footing. Thus, it is natural to promote time as an operator in relativistic quantum mechanics because position is also treated as an operator. Relativistic particles have spin and are governed by different equations of motion, e.g. Klein-Gordon equation for spin-0 particles and Dirac equation for spin-1/2 particles. However, problems such as negative energies and negative probabilities arise because of the existence of anti-particles.

Anti-particles allows relativistic quantum mechanics to naturally bypass Pauli's theorem because the Hamiltonian is not bounded from below but this leads to another problem. That is, particle and anti-particle pairs are spontaneously created and annihilated in a relativistic system so we cannot be sure that when we perfrom a TOA experiment, the particle that arrived is the same particle that we started with. This is evident in the Klein-Gordon equation wherein time-evolution mixes the positive and negative energy solutions, while the Dirac equation mixes the particle and anti-particle solutions. Nevertheless, we still insist that if we perform a TOA experiment, then we will obtain a TOA distribution. Now, assuming that TOA is indeed a dynamical observable we can ask: Does this TOA distribution have an underlying ideal distribution generated by the spectral resolution of a corresponding TOA operator? If so, how do we construct this relativistic TOA operator?






<!-- vector fields wherein one has zero divergence while the other has zero curl, that is $$\vec{A}(\vec{x},t) = \vec{A}_\parallel(\vec{x},t) + \vec{A}_\bot(\vec{x},t) $$, where, $$\nabla \times \vec{A}_\parallel(\vec{x},t) = 0$$ and $\nabla \cdot \vec{A}_\bot(\vec{x},t) = 0$. It follows that we can write $\vec{A}_\parallel(\vec{x},t) = \nabla \chi(\vec{x},t)$ where $\chi(\vec{x},t)$ is a scalar field.   

It is easy to see that $\vec{A}_\bot(\vec{x},t)$ is now gauge-invariant while the scalar field $\chi(\vec{x},t)$ transforms as $\chi(\vec{x},t) \rightarrow \chi(\vec{x},t) + \Lambda(\vec{x},t)$. We can thus define a new gauge-invariant quantity $\Phi(\vec{x},t) = V(\vec{x},t) + \partial_t\chi(\vec{x},t)$ and rewrite the minimally coupled Schrodinger equation in terms of these gauge-invariant fields
\begin{align}
	i\hbar \dfrac{\partial \phi(\vec{x},t)}{\partial t} = \left[ -\dfrac{1}{2m} \left( -i\hbar \nabla - q \vec{A}_\bot(\vec{x},t)\right)^2 + q \Phi(\vec{x},t) \right] \phi(\vec{x},t)
	\label{eq:segi}
\end{align}
where $\phi(\vec{x},t) = e^{-iq \chi(\vec{x},t)/\hbar} \psi(\vec{x},t)$. The fields $\vec{A}_\bot(\vec{x},t)$ and $\Phi(\vec{x},t)$ are the physical degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic field. Using Eq. \eqref{eq:segi}, the Hamiltonian is now gauge-invariant and it is easy to see that the arising standard time of arrival distribution is also gauge-invariant. Using these transforms, the quantum flux also gauge-invariant.   -->
